[whimsical music]
[birds chirping]
[lighthearted acoustic music]
[music continues]
[wind blowing]
[Yui breathes heavily]
Cape Fox Cub is
what they call this place.
[Yui panting]
Just a bit further.
[birds chirping]
Here we are.
Welcome to our new home, girls.
Huh?
[birds chirping]
[lighthearted music]
[Kiwa] Pretty, isn't it?
The flowers bloom even
with no one to tend to them.
I'm so excited to
finally live out here.
[music continues]
It's falling apart.
Goodness.
You really outdid yourself
getting this place ready.
Oh, wow.
It's actually pretty nice.
[Kiwa] In the old
days, this end of the house
probably would've
had built-in stables.
All right, you two.
Come sit down.
[creature howls]
Is that a wolf?
Never you mind.
I promise there are
no wolves around here.
Now, come sit with me a moment.
Now, starting
today, the three of us
will build new lives together.
I'm very glad you came.
Thanks, I guess.
It's all right.
Don't force yourself to speak.
Just rest, and you'll
recover before you know it.
To that point,
go grab your bags and relax.
I'll need your help
with something in a while.
[Yui sighs]
My new home.
Huh.
[rain pattering]
[wood creaking]
[Yui grunts]
[tree thuds]
[Yui] That better?
You alone?
What's your name?
Okay, never mind.
[calming music]
Hey, everyone!
We have some provisions here,
courtesy of Senda Foods!
Some of the packaging
is a little damaged,
but the food
inside is perfectly fine.
There we go. Gather round.
What do you want?
Apologize to that girl.
Sorry, but I don't
take orders from children.
[inhales sharply]
There, there.
You all right, darling?
- Hey, what happened?
- [man grunts]
Now let's get you dried off
before you catch a cold, huh?
You're just about
soaked to the bone.
Tanaka, will you get
a towel for this young lady?
You got it!
Such a sweetheart.
I feel bad that she's mute.
- Huh?
- More accurately,
she lost her voice.
Poor thing's been
through terrible trauma.
Her parents died in
a car wreck around New Year's,
and she hasn't spoken since.
Not a single word.
She had just come to live with
some relatives in this area,
but then the earthquake
hit and well, you know.
She showed up
here all on her own.
[inaudible dialogue]
Uh, thanks.
Now then, Hiyori.
Are you excited to
get back to school soon?
[woman]
Yoshi, could you lend me a hand?
Of course!
Hey, you're a high
school student, aren't you?
Have you gotten to put yourself
down for registration yet?
Uh, no. I...
What's your name, hun?
Are you staying
with family or...
- I'm not.
- Where do you live?
There's gotta be
somewhere you call home.
You know
what? I'm actually fine.
- Wait.
- Oh, she's with me.
I'm her grandma.
Her name is...
Oh, it's not Akemi,
and I know it's not Sanae,
it's one of those trendy names.
- [Yui] Yui.
- Ah, there we go.
Yui, I knew that.
And this little one.
Really? Hiyori too?
That's right, Hiyori too.
[woman] You're really
her grandmother, ma'am?
Of course I am.
Why else would
I have come to pick her up?
You've had to go through
so much at such a young age,
but you've never once given up.
I'm very proud of you.
[gentle music]
They are my grandkids,
but it's our first time meeting.
And my memory's
foggy these days,
so it can take
a while for names to sink in.
Now, shall we get going?
Get your things.
Sorry, but may
I ask your name first?
- I'm Kiwa Yamana.
- [woman] And you live...
There's a place ready and
waiting for us in Kitsunezaki.
We'll discuss the details soon,
but I think it's
going to be wonderful.
If you girls are all alone,
know you have a place with me.
Never you mind, all right?
It just means don't worry, dear.
Looks like
it stopped raining too.
I was just going
with the flow before,
but can we trust this old lady?
[Kiwa] Yui, Hiyori.
Could I trouble you ladies
to follow me for just a moment?
[metal clangs]
Why? What for?
At least tell us
where we're going.
Ugh! Here.
[Kiwa] For today,
just cut up to the well,
then go clean the halls, okay?
The well?
[mellow music]
Come on!
[water splashes]
[music continues]
[Yui grunts]
[Yui breathes heavily]
[music continues]
[Yui grunts]
[Yui groans]
Jeez!
Is this why she brought us
all the way out here? To clean?
[paper squeaks]
Um...
Do sliding doors usually make
that sound when they get torn?
[Kiwa] Sounds
like you're all done.
Come see what
we're having for dinner.
[steam whistles]
[Kiwa] This is urui miso soup.
Urui?
[Kiwa] It all came
out of the lawn clippings
you two cut earlier.
We'll also have mugwort tempura
and some wild rocambole.
So it's all grass?
Well, hold your horses.
For our main
course, hamburger steaks.
[Yui sniffs]
Smells good.
Then what are we waiting for?
[Yui] Uh, thank you.
Pretty good.
[lighthearted music]
Don't forget to try
some of the tempura too.
Really good.
[music continues]
[Kiwa] And we have
milk pudding for dessert.
[Yui] This has grass in it too?
Oh, wow.
[Yui] Oh, thank you again.
Oh, it was nothing.
[Yui] I never had
food like this at home.
[Yui gasps]
Why don't
you put your things away
and hop in the bath before bed?
Do you need a change of clothes?
No, I have plenty.
That's good, but I'm sure
you're missing
other things, right?
So make a list, and we can
all go to Masuda Mall tomorrow.
Don't let your guard down
just because the food was good.
All right, Hiyori?
There's a story.
How's it go?
"Kids get lured in with food
so a stranger can
fatten them up like livestock."
- [wind blowing]
- Uh-uh.
[eerie moaning]
[Kiwa] Are you two
about ready for your bath?
[fire crackles]
[water splashes]
That story I mentioned.
If I remember
correctly, an evil witch
invites these abandoned
siblings into her home.
She feeds them, then prepares
a big pot of boiling water
to cook them.
Sound familiar?
You girls have a nice bath?
I guess.
What's the matter, dear?
This house.
Why is it...
you know, out here?
I mean, look, we don't--
[Kiwa] I know. Come, sit.
Drink some tea.
This tea is made
from dandelion root.
It's good for you.
I want to tell
you a little story.
One that happened back
in the days of yore, long ago.
- Huh?
- It's just a local phrase.
Like "in a far away land,"
or "once upon a time."
There once was a small village
near the base of a mountain.
In this village lived a woman
who was absent-minded
but very kind.
- [tense drum music]
- [twigs cracking]
[Kiwa] One day, the woman
set off into the mountains
to collect some butterbur.
Determined to find
only the best butterbur,
she ventured deep into the
wilderness, ignoring the rain.
Eventually, she happened
across the most magnificent
front gate she had ever seen.
"Oh, my!" She thought.
Who would build a house
so deep in the mountains?
And hoping to take shelter
from the worsening storm,
she nervously
stepped through the gate.
"Is anyone home?"
she called out,
approaching the front door.
But there was no answer,
so she carefully
took a peek inside.
The house
appeared indeed to be empty,
but the hearth was lit,
and the most
delicious looking feast
was spread out, just waiting.
[music continues]
"Well, surely there must be
someone here," she wondered.
So careful not
to touch anything,
she quietly let herself out
to rush back home.
[music continues]
Sometime later,
the woman was doing
some washing by the river
and saw a small bowl
drift past,
shining red and beautiful.
She decided she would
take it home with her,
and use it to measure out rice
for her family.
And as long as
she used that bowl,
they never seemed to run out,
no matter how much they ate.
Why is it,
they all began to ask,
that we never run
out of rice anymore?
The woman simply shrugged,
and told them of
the lovely red bowl
that came
floating down the river.
And, that strangely enough,
it looked very much
like the bowls she had seen
in the house on the mountain.
That house was a mayoiga,
a place that
bestows hospitality
and good
fortune on its visitors.
It's rumored
that if you find one,
you can take anything
inside back home with you.
Some believe that because
this woman took nothing
and had no greed in her heart,
this mayoiga gave
her that bowl as a gift.
From that day forward,
her family prospered,
and she came to be known
as the village elder.
[Hiyori claps]
Cool story.
What folk tale was that?
That one's just
called "Mayoiga", of course.
And they're everywhere.
So be sure to keep
your eye out for one.
[Yui] I wonder why
she picked that story.
What the...
When did she lay out futons?
She was with us all...
Huh?
This is where
I poked that hole before, right?
Did that old lady do this too?
Oh, are you sleepy?
Makes sense.
If things go south, we can run.
Both of us.
[birds chirping]
Well, good morning.
Morning.
Did you sleep well, Yui?
Probably the best
I've slept in a while.
- [wind blowing]
- [eerie moaning]
It's that weird noise again.
Hey, do we have
anything to drink?
[Kiwa] I could make some tea.
Oh...
Just water is fine.
[cup clinks]
I'd like some ice too!
[ice cubes clanging]
What the heck?
What is up with this house?
Remember the story?
This is a mayoiga too.
A house that's hospitable
to the ones who enter it.
- That was real?
- [eerie moaning]
[Yui gasps]
It repaired the sliding door
you tore a hole in,
it laid out your futon,
and it even prepared
the hot water for your bath.
Everything it does is for you.
This is all for you, you know.
Everything I do is for you.
[melancholic music]
[Yui breathes heavily]
[glass shatters]
[floorboards creaking]
I can't do this.
[somber music]
Not again.
[music continues]
What's the matter?
You can't even
bother to welcome me home?
Welcome home.
If you've got
time to play house,
then you've got time to study.
You realize how piss poor
your grades are, don't you?
What's wrong?
Don't like being reminded?
If you weren't such an idiot,
I wouldn't have
to treat you like one,
and just maybe your mother
wouldn't have left us.
[gasps]
Look at me when I'm speaking!
- [plate crashes]
- It's time you learn
some responsibility.
I'm only telling you all
of this for your own good.
Are you okay?
Are you hurt?
I'm sorry.
I just....
You don't have anywhere
to go either, do you, Hiyori?
Yui? Hiyori?
Is everything all right?
Oh, looks like
you took a tumble.
I believe this is yours.
You're safe here, Yui.
You don't need to be
scared of the house, I promise.
It only wants to
help take care of you.
The mayoiga would
never hurt you or Hiyori, okay?
So why don't we go back?
[Yui grunts]
[Kiwa groans]
[Kiwa chuckles]
[door opens]
Now then, I think it's
about time for breakfast.
[eerie moaning]
And it's really safe?
'Cause, I mean...
[Kiwa] The longer we stay,
the more the house will improve.
If you care for
it and speak well of it,
it will grow wonderfully,
just like a person.
I'm sorry.
That's good.
[Kiwa] Is
that really all you want?
Most girls
would want a hair dryer,
and other stuff like that.
How about some cute
new cushions for the sofa?
I may not look it,
but I was something
of a workhorse in my day.
I have quite
the nest egg tucked away.
So don't feel like
you have to hold back.
- [gentle music]
- [Yui] Holy crap,
that's cute.
[Kiwa]
Why don't we get it then?
[Yui] Huh?
[Kiwa] You like it, don't you?
"Holy crap, that's cute."
[Yui] Uh...
[Kiwa] Are there any other
"crap" things you forgot to
look for?
[Yui]
That's not really how you use
that word, but I don't know.
No one's ever spent this
kind of money on me before.
[music continues]
[Kiwa] I don't know
about you, but I'm exhausted.
Let's go with
something lazy for dinner.
[music continues]
And here we are.
Careful, they're hot.
[Hiyori blows]
[gasps, pants]
[all panting]
Oh wow, you can
really smell the miso.
It's just rice
balls and pickles today.
I got too tuckered out
from all that shopping.
Well, you did go
a little overboard.
Like with the rice cake maker?
Oh, you think so?
Who was it that got
that bread maker again?
That was only because you said
you wanted to
try homemade bread.
[Kiwa] And
someone else said they wanted
to try my fresh rice cakes.
Remember that?
[footsteps tapping]
- [Kiwa laughs]
- [eerie moaning]
What do you think
you're laughing about, huh?
[music continues]
[motorcycle revs]
First day back in a while.
What year are you in now?
Will you be okay on your own?
Oh, wait a sec.
Sorry this is partially used,
but you can use
it to say stuff in class.
Maybe I'll head into town today.
I'm glad you're back.
So then, you're
not changing schools?
Kana had to move
away, so I got scared
that you were gonna
go off somewhere else too.
Makio! Fox dance
practice starts today, right?
Yeah, right after school.
See? What she said.
Oh, you should come too, Hiyori.
You haven't
seen the fox dance yet.
[laughs]
That's the bon festival dance.
[birds cawing]
[water splashes]
[woman] Look who it is.
I was just thinking about
visiting you girls at home.
So, everything going smoothly?
Oh, yeah.
Let me know if you need help
with your change of
address forms.
Don't forget, you still
have to do move out paperwork
for wherever you lived before.
And how come
you're not in school?
[Yui] Oh, I dropped out.
Really? I didn't know.
[Yoshi] Hello, hello.
Oh, hi Yoshi!
I'm glad to see
you looking so well, Yui.
Are Grandma
and Hiyori doing okay?
[Yui] Uh, yeah.
Oh, that's wonderful to hear.
I have to get going,
but please remind your grandma
about the paperwork for me.
[Yoshi] Take it easy.
Is the house
treating you all right?
I know it's quite old.
Yeah, it's great.
My great-grandfather
used to live there, you know.
It had quite a bit of damage,
but Kiwa had some
repairs done here and there,
and now
she says it's good as new.
Repairs, huh?
So, you're all right?
I'm kind of the land lady,
so please do let me
know if you ever need my help.
Thank you. We're all good.
[Yoshi] It is a little out
of the way though, huh?
Do you have a bicycle?
I don't, but
the hills would make that
kind of a nightmare anyway.
[Yoshi] Do
you have your license?
Motorbike only.
Oh, do you really?
[frame clangs]
[Yoshi] This fine
young man is my nephew.
Oh, thanks for this.
You're good.
My old man's gone,
and I quit doing deliveries.
So if you don't mind
it being ancient, it's yours.
Um, how much do you want for it?
I'm a little
short right now, but--
- [man] It's fine.
- No, I insist.
I insist right back.
Take it and run.
[Yui] Um, I'm actually in town
to look for a part-time job,
so when--
Oh, that's perfect.
[lighthearted music]
[Yoshi] Tomoko has been
advertising for a part-timer
for a while now.
Are you in school?
- Um, actually--
- She dropped out.
She came to the evacuation
shelter all by herself,
but then her grandma
came and picked her up.
Oh, and Hiyori?
She'll get to stay here too,
because these two
have the same grandma.
Wait...
So that means, Yui...
Which of you and
Hiyori's parents were siblings?
Uh...
Wow, sounds like you've
been through a lot lately.
I'm afraid I can't offer
that much, but if that's okay...
Oh.
Yeah, thanks, I appreciate it.
- Welcome home.
- [Yui] What's up?
Where did that come from?
[Yui] Yoshi's nephew that runs
a noodle shop gave it to me.
Oh!
[Yui] And I got a job.
Senda Foods was
looking for some help, so.
That's wonderful.
What's that?
I thought I'd make
Hiyori some pancakes.
Aren't you sweet.
I think she'll love that.
- [music continues]
- [bell tolls]
My family used to be
the head fishermen here.
There would always be
a ton of fishing boats nearby,
and we always had
the other fishermen over.
Hi, everybody!
Oh, welcome home, Reiko.
How you doin'?
That's my
grandpa, and my brother.
This is Hiyori.
She's the girl I told you about.
That's right,
you're the transfer student.
Nice to meet ya!
So, this will be
your first fox dance?
We could put her on the flute.
The flute. Good idea.
I'll pull one
and bring it to you.
I can't wait!
Makio, we're ready for you.
Roger that. Let's get started.
Good afternoon, everyone.
[all] Good afternoon!
Thank you all very much
for making the time
to be here today.
The summer festival may
have been canceled this year,
but I remain ever hopeful
that we'll be able to hold
the autumn festival as usual.
Many of us are
struggling right now,
so let's remain mindful of that,
and use this time
to lift each other up.
[people clapping]
That said, let's start with
the musical accompaniment.
Let's go sit down.
[traditional
drum and flute music]
[woman singing in Japanese]
Hiyori?
- [woman continues
singing in Japanese]
- Hiyori?
[music continues]
[Yui] And I gotta change
the address on my license.
Right, right. That's a lot.
You can leave all that to me.
Uh, but I still need
a change of address form
for my old place too.
And I don't
think you can do that
when we're not actually related.
Never you mind.
I'll figure
something out, I always do.
[eerie moaning]
Uh-huh. Looks like she's home.
Huh?
Welcome home.
How did school go today, Hiyori?
What's a fox dance?
Now that is a very
longstanding community event.
It's a traditional ceremony
to help drive out evil.
The local children
dress up like foxes,
masks and all, and dance.
Why foxes when
we're so close to the ocean?
There's a reason.
And it all began way
back in the days of yore.
[tense music]
[Kiwa] Long, long ago, before
this beach even had a name,
a monster appeared offshore.
An eight foot sea serpent
that began to drift
ever closer towards the land.
When people
approached the shore on foot,
they were sent flying.
When they came by sea,
their boats
were cracked in two,
and plunged into
the depths without fail.
And when anyone dared
look into the monster's eyes,
they saw awful,
terrifying visions.
[music continues]
The villagers all decided
they would simply stay away.
And then one day,
a group of foxes paid a visit
to an old man by the beach,
who had always
been kind enough
to share his fish with them.
But this time,
they brought him a gift.
A small knife
that could cut through evil.
"Use this knife to
blind the beast," they said.
To support the old man,
the village banded together.
They played music, and
danced with ceremonial arrows,
helping weaken
the evil he was about to face.
[music continues]
Evil that appears
in the human world
can only be purified
by humans.
And at the cost
of one human life,
the monster was
finally vanquished.
From that day forth,
this area has been known to
its residents as Cape Fox Cub.
So ends the tale.
Wow.
So that was
the start of the fox dance?
It would seem so.
You ran away?
What, from dance practice?
What happened?
[somber music]
[man] I can't believe
she lost them both at once.
[woman] I heard the man who hit
them was asleep at the wheel.
[man] Who's
gonna take her in now?
[woman] Apparently she has
relatives in Kitsunezaki.
[woman 2] Is that wise?
I mean, her voice.
[woman 3] I heard she was
the only one who survived.
[woman 4] She's all
alone now. Poor thing.
Hiyori.
[Yoshi] Good afternoon!
[Yui] A cat?
[Yoshi] No farmhouse
is complete without one,
especially with
no dogs in the area.
But I couldn't
find the right fit.
And then this
sweet thing showed up.
He's soft and friendly,
so I thought you'd get along.
He does seem sweet, doesn't he?
[Yui] Can we keep him?
[Kiwa] Can, should, and will.
[Yoshi] That's great!
And I just know he'll be pleased
to have found a home.
Let's name him Kofuku.
Kofuku?
[Kiwa] Yes.
It means "tiny luck."
I've adopted more
than a few cats in my life,
but I always tend to
give them the same name.
It's a reminder
that good fortune
doesn't have to be excessive,
and we can find small moments
of happiness every day.
Huh.
[lighthearted music]
[Reiko] Hello?
[chuckling]
Amazing! A real picnic!
Well, make sure
you eat up, okay?
[Reiko] Okay!
That's yummy!
[Yui] Want some tea?
Huh? Thank you, it smells good.
Mm-mm. But you weren't.
I'm sorry I was so pushy
about you being there.
And your family are
all shrine parishioners?
[Reiko] Oh, yeah.
They've organized the festivals
for our guardian deity pretty
much forever.
That's wonderful.
So then, do you help out
with all the music and dancing?
Yes! I try to perform in
the summer and autumn festivals
every year.
Oh, and my grandpa
asked me to teach Hiyori
the flute part this year,
but only if she wants to.
Ah, that sounds so lovely.
What do you think, Hiyori?
Yay, that's great!
And so is this!
- [Yui chuckles]
- [Reiko] You're so lucky,
Hiyori.
Do you guys
always eat such good food?
[Yui] What are you looking at?
[Kiwa] Oh, just
out at Sodegaura there.
There used to
be a little Inari shrine
on that rock by the caves,
but the tsunami
almost washed it all away.
Looks like they finally
came to survey the damage.
Where are the caves?
You gotta look real close
if you don't already
know where they are.
There's the first
one, and the second,
and the third one's over there.
The third one is huge.
It can even fit a Sappa boat.
- [Yui] Which is...
- [Reiko] It's a tiny little
fishing boat,
and the cave is
hollow, so on a nice day,
you can go in and
see how pretty the water is.
[Yui] Cool.
[Kiwa] You know, there are
actually four caves down there.
[Yui] Really?
Where's the fourth one?
[Kiwa] It's so deep, you can't
even see it during low tide.
I never knew that.
[Kiwa] The fourth cave is
the biggest of them all.
[melancholic music]
Though now I'm certain
everyone just wanted to forget
it existed.
Hm?
Well, anyway, let's dig
into our dessert, shall we?
And Yui, we'll have some
company tomorrow evening.
We'll need to stock up
on more food than usual.
Could I trouble you to help out?
Sure. How many
people are coming?
[Kiwa] Oh, around
seven or eight, I imagine.
They're a bit unusual though.
What does that mean?
[Kiwa gasps] Pasta?
Yui, can you make
some kind of pasta dish?
[Yui] Like carbonara?
[Kiwa] That sounds perfect.
I can't wait to see
a bit of your cooking magic.
It looks like
it might rain tomorrow.
[rain pattering]
[water splashes]
[voice] Morning, Granny.
[Kiwa] Thank you so
much for coming all this way.
[voice] Oh, come off it.
We just came down the river,
it wasn't far at all.
This is a matter of
the utmost importance,
so we're ready to
do whatever it takes.
[voice 3] But I've never gone
diving in the sea before.
I wonder if it'll feel
the same as the river.
At the very least, it's bound
to be easier than traveling
on land.
It's probably
just a little salty.
Huh?
You gave me a fright, my child.
[chuckling]
[lighthearted music]
[Kiwa] Hiyori, meet the Kappa
of the Sarugaishi River.
- Hello!
- [Kiwa] The Shizukuishi River.
- Howdy.
- [Kiwa] The Kitakami River.
- Regards.
- [Kiwa] The Kozuchi River.
- Hi.
- Toyosawa River here.
And I'm from the Mabechi River.
Good morning.
This little one
is my granddaughter, Hiyori.
It seems she's unable
to use her voice these days.
I'm sorry to hear that,
but don't worry too much.
If you just take it easy,
it'll be back in no time.
[Kiwa] You see those
three openings down there?
There's a fourth cavern
just to the left of them.
But the entrance
is below sea level,
so could I trouble you to
poke around inside for me?
I believe
the original cap is long gone,
and the shrine
was there to replace it,
but as you can see,
the shrine was destroyed.
Ah, wiped out by the tsunami.
I see the problem here.
You think something
has broken free of its seal.
- Makes sense.
- All right then,
let's find out.
Yeah.
- [Kitakami Kappa] Let's go!
- [Sarugaishi Kappa] Alley-oop!
[Kappa grunting]
[water splashes]
It's been a busy
morning, hasn't it?
I may need both of you to
help me prepare dinner today.
Were you frightened?
And you know they're not
evil creatures, right, Hiyori?
No matter what
we look like outside,
the heart matters most.
Now, let's go wake your sister.
[Yui] What exactly
have we been making all day?
It's almost all cucumbers.
Well, they're
kappa's favorite food.
What? Uh...
Oh, you're in on it too?
So, what's the end game here?
[bird caws]
[Kiwa] Thank
you for your help today.
We'll have dinner after
you wash off the saltwater.
I'm sure being in
the ocean for that long is rough
even for you guys,
but I do appreciate it.
- [Kappa chattering]
- [Yui gasps]
[water splashes]
Ah, there you go.
Yui, don't be
afraid, but kappa are real.
They aren't just things
you hear about in stories.
There was something
I wanted them to check on,
so I invited them to dinner.
Keep in mind,
there aren't many humans
who know kappa are real,
which means that you and
Hiyori are among a precious few.
If we're going to be
living together as a family,
I felt like it would be wrong
of me not to introduce you.
Oh.
[Kiwa] I do have to ask that you
don't tell anyone about this.
But what do
you think? Are you angry?
Do you feel sick?
You look a little pale.
How are you, Hiyori?
You're not scared?
[calming music]
As long as you're okay with it,
then I'm okay with it too.
What a great big sister.
You're sincere
and very tenacious.
I really love that about you.
Now then, back to work.
[Mabechi Kappa]
Thank you for having us.
[Kitakami Kappa] Coming through.
[Kitakami Kappa]
Sorry for barging in.
[Toyosawa Kappa]
I wiped my feet.
[Sarugaishi Kappa]
Forgive our imposition.
[Kozuchi Kappa]
Uh, what they said.
Oh, man, this looks delicious!
[Mabechi Kappa] Yeah, thank you.
[Kiwa] So you were able to
enter the fourth cave, right?
Oh, did we ever!
And man, it's huge in there.
And we're sorry to report,
it was just as
you feared, Granny.
We sensed that something had
definitely been sealed there.
[Mabechi Kappa]
But it must have run off.
The cavern was completely empty.
I think you were right about
the function of the shrine too.
That's what
broke the seal in the end.
All we can do is hope
that thing doesn't hurt anyone.
Call us again if anything
happens. We'll always help.
Whoa! What do
you call this stuff?
It's amazing!
Uh, carbonara.
It's nice.
More like kappa-rbonara.
No, no, go get your own plate!
My granddaughter, Yui,
made it just for you lot.
Really? You're a genius, Yui!
I already told you, get your
own! I'm serious! Give it back!
[Mabechi Kappa] Hey!
My kappa-rbonara.
You know,
I've seen these before,
but I've never had
the pleasure of trying one.
[Toyosawa Kappa] Go eat
a cucumber or something!
[Kitakami Kappa]
Can say the same to you.
So who are you really, Granny?
Are we even sure
that you're human?
All the creatures from folklore
are what I call enigmas.
And very rarely there are humans
who can truly engage
and communicate with them.
I fall into the latter category.
[Toyosawa Kappa] Everybody
shut up. I'm gonna sing a song!
- [Kitakami Kappa] Don't even
think about it.
- [indistinct chattering]
[Shizukuishi Kappa]
I don't know.
That sounds like fun to me.
[Toyosawa Kappa] This is a song
from a school by my river.
I memorized the whole thing.
- [Mabechi Kappa] Here we go.
- [Toyosawa Kappa] It's got
dogs and cats.
It's a really cute song.
[Mabechi Kappa]
Oh, it's cute, huh?
[Shizukuishi Kappa]
I hope he starts soon.
I can't wait anymore.
[Toyosawa Kappa] Here I go.
Wait, I forgot the words.
[Kappa laughing]
[Kitakami Kappa] Come on!
See ya!
Everything was delicious!
I can't sleep at all.
Guess she had fun.
[lighthearted music]
[whooshing]
[cat meowing, hissing]
[cat snarls]
[whooshing]
- [creature screeching]
- Careful!
What was that?
A snake?
[cat purrs]
Okay, I'm going to work.
Oh, I prayed to
a Jizo guardian deity.
For what?
[Kiwa] For you girls to get to
stay here for a long time.
Oh. Thank you.
What are you makin'?
A few bars of soap.
[Yui] I didn't
know you could do that.
It's simple. Come
smell all the herbs I put in.
Oh, wow.
That does smell really good.
I wanna learn how to do that.
Rain check though.
I'll see you later.
Okay. Have a good day, love.
[bright music]
[woman] See you next time.
[Yui] Thanks for coming in.
Would you mind
making a delivery for me?
You'd be free to head
straight home when you're done.
[Yui] Sure.
- Welcome in!
- Oh, hey.
How are you doing?
Hello.
I'm glad I ran into you.
Those forms I told you about?
Turns out
they were already done.
I guess I just
glossed over them.
What? Okay.
We're really
understaffed at town hall.
Sorry, Yui.
[Yui] No, it's fine.
[music continues]
[motorbike revs]
Senda Foods here.
I have a delivery.
Great. Thank you so much.
Could you just put
it right there for me?
[Yui] Sure.
That's right.
You guys have
rehearsal today, don't you?
Goin' well?
[man] How's
the bike treating you?
[Yui] Oh, it's been great.
Good to hear.
Did you come to observe
the fox dance? Or to join it?
What? I'm just--
It's more exciting
the more people we get though.
That's great, but I--
Teens' choreography
involves one of these arrows.
Here.
Okay.
I'm not...
[lighthearted music]
[chuckling]
Thanks for having me.
[Yoshi's nephew]
Sure. See you next week.
[Yoshi]
Girls, be careful going home.
The strangest
things keep happening.
- Huh?
- My poor little dog
hasn't stopped barking once
since last night.
One of our neighborhood cats
suddenly disappeared,
and several people
have said they've seen ghosts.
You know Murata
from the skewer place?
He said he saw
his late wife at the front door.
- [eerie music]
- Darling.
Let's get going already.
And a few days later,
he completely disappeared.
Well, I heard
Komiyama saw his neighbor
even though she had moved
away long before the earthquake.
You should think
about moving too, Komiyama.
You won't miss it here.
[woman] And it wasn't a dream?
[Yoshi] He said this
was in broad daylight.
[Yui] That was kind of freaky.
I wonder if it has anything to
do with that snake from
last night.
The kappa did
mention that a seal
had been lifted from that cave
and something
might have escaped,
but they didn't say what.
[leaves rustle]
Who's there?
[leaves rustling]
- [Yui gasps]
- [whooshing]
[creature screeches]
Okay, so there
are two of them now.
[creature screeches]
[lion-dogs growling]
Uh...
[Kiwa] Yui, Hiyori.
[Yui] Lion-dogs?
[Kiwa] We're very
thankful you two came
all this way to help.
These lion-dogs guard
the shelter's shrine.
Oh. They do, huh?
[ethereal music]
They've decided they're
going to stay here with us
for a little while.
So the pointy snakes,
what are those things?
Vile creatures
from the days of yore.
[tense music]
[Kiwa] Do you remember
the sea serpent monster
from the fox dance story?
It was known as Red Eyes.
I'm sure you can guess why.
It used its eyes to make
people see terrifying visions.
Visions of
their dear friends dying,
visions of
long lost loved ones.
[music continues]
Anguish was made manifest
to torment and drive
people away from their homes,
allowing Red Eyes to feast on
the cries
in villager's hearts.
Eventually,
not a single soul remained.
In these places,
newly devoid of life,
Red Eyes would make its home
until it was
blinded and sealed away,
as the fox dance tale goes.
[music continues]
[Kiwa] The fourth cave is
the biggest of them all.
[music continues]
Unfortunately, this story didn't
have a happily ever after.
What does the part
about crying hearts mean?
It's just an expression.
When we suffer, our hearts cry.
It happens to all of us
at some point or other.
Before you came
to Kitsunezaki, Hiyori,
you suffered
a terrible tragedy, right?
And then you went
through the earthquake
not too long after you arrived.
You must have felt
hopeless and very scared.
What kinds of things go
through your mind now, Hiyori?
[melancholic music]
That's very common. Believe me.
When we go
through something terrible,
we tend to wonder, "Why me?"
But remember this.
It's not your fault, love.
Right now, the "why me"s
are being
expressed in different ways.
There's resentment and regret.
"I should have done this,
I shouldn't have done that."
There's the loneliness
of losing the people
closest to you.
There's the guilt
of being a sole survivor
by random chance.
Feelings are piling up,
creeping into our daily lives
more than ever.
Red Eyes is eating our grief
and building its power.
But never you mind.
How so?
Hey!
What now?
[ethereal whooshing]
What were those?
Uh...
Follow me into
town for a bit, would you?
[waves crashing]
I know it's
around here somewhere.
Ah-huh, that must be it.
Yui, could
you turn the light off?
I can't express
enough how grateful I am
that you came this far.
This is Tanaka, a Jizo
guardian deity from Morioka.
[Yui exhales nervously]
But I have to
reprimand you for leaving home
on such short notice.
Morioka is going to fall
into chaos without you there.
You know that.
[Tanaka] I had to come, Granny.
What if I didn't and
something bad happened to you?
I couldn't live with
that on my conscience.
[Kiwa] I understand
that you were worried,
but you do stick out a bit.
Surely you know that.
[Tanaka] Okay, I get it.
You don't have
to get so mad at me.
Oh please, I'm not mad.
You know I'm grateful.
Though as long as we're here,
where have all
the others come from then?
[Tanaka] There's the Jizo
of sumo fighting spirit,
Zaimokucho's Jizo
of business success,
the Jizo from
Nishine and Hanamaki.
The Jizo from Ichinoseki.
And the lion-dogs from
the Ikkeijima shrine in Miyagi.
I think that's it.
So then,
everyone else is significantly
smaller than you are.
That's a relief at least.
[Tanaka] But Granny,
with the way things are going,
or look like they're going,
it won't matter
whether we stand out or not.
Whenever there's
serious danger brewing,
we'll all be here to help.
You need only ask.
I know.
And I do appreciate it.
[lighthearted music]
[music continues]
I wrote to Kana,
but she still hasn't answered.
[kid yawns]
Not at all.
She said she was
moving to Kanagawa Prefecture,
and once she had a new address,
she would write me back.
But I haven't heard
anything from her since.
And I don't know if I ever will.
I'm scared that
she doesn't want anything to do
with Kitsunezaki at all anymore.
My mom thinks
she only wants to forget about
what happened
with the earthquake.
And until then,
she can't move on or whatever.
I'm supposed to understand,
but I'm still here.
So is she gonna forget me too?
You think so?
[creature hisses]
[Tomoko] Hi, welcome in.
[Yui gasps]
- [melancholic piano music]
- [Yui breathes heavily]
[inaudible dialogue]
[cart rattles]
Uh, Yui?
[Yui breathes heavily]
[gentle music]
[Yui sobs]
[Yui screams, sobs]
[music continues]
[waves crashing]
[flute plays]
[Kiwa claps]
You've gotten so good.
You have some
real talent, young lady.
[eerie moaning]
[Kiwa] Oh, welcome home.
Did something happen?
He found me.
[Kiwa] Who did?
My dad.
[Kiwa gasps]
I, um...
I ran away.
I couldn't live
like that anymore.
I was about to break.
So I left, and
then the earthquake hit,
and I keep wondering...
why does this
always happen to me?
It's...
It's just not fair.
[Kiwa] Never you mind.
Don't you forget.
You're the most tenacious
young lady I've ever met.
And I truly love that about you.
[Yui breathes shakily]
Now then, you get weekends
off from work, don't you?
Next long weekend, why don't
the three of us go visit Tono?
Huh?
[ethereal music]
[creature screeches]
[Reiko sighs]
[ethereal music]
[creature screeches]
[water splashes]
[wind blowing]
[mellow music]
We can get there in this?
[Kiwa] Yep, that's right.
How long is it gonna take?
[Kiwa] We're
going against the current,
so it'll probably take a day.
- Huh?
- [Kiwa] Fun, right?
[Kozuchi Kappa] Hey,
I'll go as fast as I can.
[Kiwa] Well,
don't over exert yourself.
Yeah, I'll tag in
the Toyosawa Kappa halfway.
[lighthearted music]
- Granny!
- I missed you!
Hi! How is everyone?
- Good.
- How have you been, Granny?
Oh, me?
I've been doing swimmingly.
[female Kappa] Thank you.
You've been such a big help.
A mayoiga passed through
here a few times before, right?
If you find one
that suits your fancy,
you oughta stay put.
[Kiwa] You know,
back when I was a little girl,
this forest was my playground.
I couldn't have been
much older than Hiyori is now.
I'd get myself lost,
but I'd always find my way.
Because this mayoiga is given
to wandering the mountains.
[Yui] Huh?
[music continues]
Ta-da!
Here we are, girls.
[music continues]
Isn't this incredible?
It's the oldest and
by far the most elegant
mayoiga in all Japan.
Take it in.
- Crazy.
- [Kiwa] I know.
And we'll be here a while,
so you'll get to explore.
[music continues]
Does that kid live here or...
Sort of. She's a house spirit.
Really?
Uh...
[grand music]
[Kiwa] Oh.
The mountain guardians
and the mountain witch came.
The God of
the Home and the Snow Woman.
The Boss Spirit from Aomori.
The Persimmon Spirit
from Miyagi.
The Fog Spirit from Fukushima.
and the Drop Pot Spirit
from Yamagata.
And even
the Liquor Spirit from Akita.
Goodness gracious,
looks like everyone is here!
Well, this does
have all the Tohoku
region enigmas pretty worried.
This goes beyond
Tohoku. Beyond Japan.
There's a sense of dread
all over the world,
and not just for the enigmas.
Humans are also worried
about areas affected by
the earthquake.
And they're about to
face even more troubles.
We believe Red Eyes is
determined to run the humans
out of Kitsunezaki
no matter what.
Some of us have discussed
hiding out in the mountains
near Kitsunezaki for a little
while in case we're needed.
I wanna go too!
Sorry, kiddo.
It's too dangerous.
Are you going? Be careful.
[enigmas] Be careful, Granny!
Yes, I promise. I'll be careful.
And all you enigmas
being there too
would give me
enormous peace of mind.
This was the best trip home
I could have asked for.
[lighthearted music]
Now then, shall
we sit down to dinner?
Looks like lamb
and veggies tonight.
Ah!
[Kiwa chuckles]
I'm curious, Yui.
What do you want to do?
- Huh?
- With your future.
Have you given thought
to what you want to become?
Can't say that I have.
[Kiwa] What are
you interested in?
What do you think would be fun?
Think about it.
You don't have to answer now.
Let yourself get lost
in thought for a while.
Eventually, you'll come
across something you can't live
without,
just like we came
across this mayoiga.
When you do, you'll
know you find your calling.
So it goes.
Find what you can do,
then do whatever you can.
[dramatic music]
This is nuts.
Well, she did say
we'd be here for a while.
You don't like it here?
Do you wanna go home?
Back to our chatterbox mayoiga?
Makes sense.
I know how you feel.
It's pretty nice
to have a safe place
we can actually
call home, isn't it?
[footsteps pattering]
Thank you both very much.
[ominous music]
So the time has
finally come for me to use this.
Take care of
my girls, all right?
[somber music]
[Yui breathes heavily]
Find her?
[Yui grunts]
Come on! Open up!
[eerie growling]
Open the gate! Open it!
You have to.
Never you mind.
Open up! We have to find Granny!
We have to go to her!
When we met, I was so scared,
and she tried to protect us
all by herself.
I wanna at least
try to be there for her,
even though I don't
have any special powers.
'Cause we're
a family now and I love her!
[dramatic music]
Thank you.
[eerie growling]
[music continues]
[both panting]
[wind howls]
[water splashes]
All right, here we go.
[intense music]
[water splashes]
[Red Eyes hisses]
[blade clangs]
[Red Eyes screeches]
What is that?
[Kiwa gasps]
[intense music]
No!
[Kiwa grunts]
[Red Eyes screeches]
[water splashes]
The heck is that about?
[man] Yui!
I found you, finally.
Hi, Dad.
I've been worried sick.
You didn't have to
leave me so suddenly.
You know you can always talk to
me if something's bothering you.
Why are you so quiet?
I'm speaking to you!
We're going home.
[mouthing wordlessly]
Stay away!
You're nothing but a parasite!
[Yui] Makes sense.
I know how you feel.
It's pretty nice
to have a safe place
we can actually
call home, isn't it?
[somber music]
[inaudible dialogue]
[wistful string music]
[Hiyori breathes heavily]
[inaudible dialogue]
[Hiyori] Yui!
Yui! Wait!
Yui, please come
back! You can't leave me!
You can't leave me,
you said we were
a family, didn't you?
You told me we'd stay together.
Yui.
Yui!
[Yui gasps]
- Hiyori?
- [man] Come on!
Let go of me!
I have my own family now, okay?
I have little sister!
We're going home.
[Yui] No, I'm safe here.
And I'm going stay here,
because this is my home now!
So let go of me!
Leave me alone!
[Hiyori] Big sis!
Oh, my gosh.
Hiyori, listen to you.
[Hiyori] I can't...I can't.
Your voice is so cute.
You can call me big sis anytime.
Okay. You scared me.
I scared myself too.
[both chuckling]
We better go.
We have to save Granny.
Mm.
[whooshing]
[foreboding music]
[dog barks]
Yes, of course.
I should go.
There's nothing for me here now.
[foreboding music]
[Kiwa] This knife won't work.
Ugh.
Everyone's
grief is out of control.
It's too powerful.
[Yui] Granny!
Oh, hey, you.
Granny's in trouble. Hop on.
But what can we do
against a monster like that?
[ethereal music]
Whoa, isn't that...
[intense music]
[Red Eyes screeches]
[Kiwa gasps]
[Kiwa grunts]
[Tanaka] Granny! Are you hurt?
Jizo guardian Tanaka!
Will that fire
spread to the town?
Not on our watch.
I believe Red Eyes
fired at the mountains
to trap
our reinforcements there.
Everyone's working hard
to keep the flames at bay.
[lightning cracks]
[Yui] It's huge.
How are we supposed to beat it?
Think, Yui.
Find what you can do
and then do what you can.
[Red Eyes screeches]
[Kiwa]
To support the old man,
the village banded together.
They played music and
danced with ceremonial arrows,
helping weaken
the evil he was about to face.
[Hiyori] Yui, this way!
Hiyori?
[lightning cracks]
Everyone has fought so hard.
Was it really all for nothing?
[intense music]
[Red Eyes growls]
[Hiyori] This is
something I can do.
[flute plays]
Hiyori?
I wonder...
[flute plays]
[intense music]
[Red Eyes screeches]
Hiyori!
Now, here's something I can do.
Here it comes! Get ready!
[music continues]
[Red Eyes screeches]
[birds chirping]
[Kiwa] It seems no one in town
remembers what happened.
That's quite a relief.
Kind of a weird
place to be enshrined.
Well, perhaps
Red Eyes had something
it needed to cry out too.
So now what?
Are you gonna stay here?
Go help other enigmas?
[Hiyori gasps]
[Hiyori] Granny!
Oh, you're awake.
You slept for quite a while.
I was afraid your eyelids
would stick together.
I'm happy to hear your voice.
Don't go. Promise me.
Please stay with us, Granny.
Ah.
I too lost my
parents early in life,
and the support of
the enigmas was invaluable.
But after traveling here
and there for so many years,
it's nice to settle down.
So unless you two decide that
you want to leave Kitsunezaki,
I'll be right here.
I think even if I do leave here,
I'll always come back.
I really love this place.
Just feels like home, you know?
Granny, can we go back to Tono?
I want to play
with the house spirit,
and thank
the kappa for all their help.
And I want to see
the lion-dogs and Tanaka again.
Hm.
Sounds like you love
the enigmas as much as I do.
Mm. I am your granddaughter.
That you are.
I recall that back then,
I was around
your age when I first met them.
They may be unusual,
but who's to say we're not?
And if you keep that in mind,
the friends you make now
will last the rest of your life.
I guarantee that.
Huh.
So, do you think Hiyori's
gonna grow up to be like you?
It certainly
wouldn't be a surprise.
She is my granddaughter,
so she's bound to take after me.
[Hiyori chuckles]
[Kiwa] That reminds me.
There's something
I want to show you two.
[lighthearted music]
It's a cherry tree.
I found it washed up on the
beach, and I planted it here.
I thought it deserved a chance
to grow nice and strong.
And look, now that it's
found a home, it's taken root,
just like us.
Do you think it's gonna bloom?
[Kiwa] Of course it will.
And it's going to be beautiful.
[music continues]
[waves crashing]
["Mayoiga" by Hitsujibungaku]
[singing in Japanese]
[music continues]
[singing continues]